Documentation: new "usage" section for the namespace offloading logic. (#800)
liqotech/liqo: docs/pages/usage/namespace_offloading.md

---
title: Namespace extension
weight: 3
---
### Introduction

> The Liqo namespace model extends the K8s namespace concepts introducing the support to remote namespaces, "twins" of the local namespace. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Liqo namespace model extends the Kubernetes namespace concept introducing the support for remote namespaces, "twins" of the local namespace. 
```

Those "twin" namespaces map the home cluster namespace on a remote cluster and its associated resources (e.g., services, configmaps). 

> Regarding pod offloading, remote namespace hosts the offloaded pods belonging to the home twin namespace, as they were executed in the home cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regarding pod offloading, remote namespaces host the offloaded pods belonging to the home twin namespace, as if they were executed in the home cluster.
```

### Quick Offloading

> Since the very first version, Liqo provides a label-based mechanism to quickly set-up namespace offloading over remote clusters.

Reviewer: Would personally avoid *historical* references, as they add no value to the reader and might become soon out-of-date,

To enable it, you should label a target namespace:

```bash

> kubectl label namespace demo-namespace liqo.io/enabled=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl label namespace target-namespace liqo.io/enabled=true
```

Demo means to me this is just a toy.

```

Pods scheduled in the "*demo-namespace*" will be potentially offloaded inside remote clusters. 

> With *quick offloading*, we are selecting all peered clusters suitable for offloading. 

Reviewer: Would be consistent, either always *we* or *you*.

> If you need a fine-grained approach, you can rely on custom offloading and the *namespaceOffloading* resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need a fine-grained approach, you can rely on custom offloading and the *NamespaceOffloading* resource.
```
Should be agreed whether CRDs should be typed italic or monospace.

Author: As k8s suggests (https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-upper-camel-case-for-api-objects) we can use italic to define or introduce new terms, and  UpperCamelCase when we refer to an API object already introduced.

Reviewer: Seems fine to me

### Custom Offloading

> As mentioned before, Liqo namespace enables the extension of the standard *v1.Namespace* over remote clusters. 

Reviewer: Would personally avoid this sentence, as it adds no value.

To control all different aspects of the namespace extension, Liqo provides a *namespaceOffloading* resource. 
The policies defined inside the *namespaceOffloading* specify how the local namespace can be replicated on peered clusters.

> Any namespace inside the home cluster can have its own *namespaceOffloading* resource and its corresponding deployment policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any namespace inside the home cluster can have its own *namespaceOffloading* resource and its corresponding offloading policy.
```

Would join (at least) the next sentence to this paragraph, to avoid single sentence paragraphs.

In other words, the *namespaceOffloading* defines "*per-namespace boundaries*", limiting the scope where pods can be remotely offloaded.

> As presented in the following example, the *namespaceOffloading* resource is composed mainly by three fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As presented in the following example, the *NamespaceOffloading* resource is composed of three main fields:
```

{{% render-code file="static/examples/namespace-offloading-default.yaml" language="yaml" %}}

> #### namespaceMappingStrategy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Selecting the namespace mapping strategy
```

Would propose to use more meaningful subtitles (the same for the others).

The namespaceMappingStrategy defines the naming strategy used to create the remote namespaces. 
The accepted values are:

| Value               | Description |
| --------------      | ----------- |
| **EnforceSameName** | The remote namespaces have the same name as the namespace in the local cluster (this approach can lead to conflicts if a namespace with the same name already exists inside the selected remote clusters). |

> | **DefaultName** (Default)    | The remote namespaces have the name of the local namespace followed by the local cluster-id to guarantee the absence of conflicts. |

Reviewer: Would personally move this as first given it is the default.

{{% notice note %}}
"(Default)" means that if you do not specify the field at the resource creation, it will be automatically generated with this default value.

> {{% /notice %}}

Reviewer: Sounds obvious to me

Author: I have removed it, thank you

{{% notice info %}}
The **DefaultName** value is recommended if you do not have particular constraints related to the remote namespaces name. 

> However, using **DefaultName** policy, the namespace name cannot be longer than 63 characters according to the [RFC 1123](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1123). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, using the **DefaultName** policy, the namespace name cannot be longer than 63 characters according to the [RFC 1123](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1123). 
```

> Since adding the cluster-id requires **37 characters**, your namespace name can have at most **26 characters**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the cluster-id is **37 characters** long, the home namespace name can have at most **26 characters**.
```

{{% /notice %}}

#### podOffloadingStrategy

> The podOffloadingStrategy defines constraints only about pod scheduling. Standard k8s services are always replicated inside all the selected clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The podOffloadingStrategy defines constraints about pod scheduling. Standard Kubernetes services are always replicated inside all the selected clusters.
```

Might be appropriate to move the service part as a note below, to also better justify the reason for the Local policy.

Author: I have moved it, thank you

| Value              | Description |
| --------------     | ----------- |
| **Local**          | The pods deployed in the local namespace are always scheduled inside the local cluster, never remotely. |
| **Remote**         | The pods deployed in the local namespace are always scheduled inside the remote clusters, never locally. |

> | **LocalAndRemote** (Default) | The pods deployed in the local namespace can be scheduled both locally and remotely. |

Reviewer: Same as before about the default.

> **LocalAndRemote** strategy does not impose constraints, it leaves the scheduler the choice to deploy locally or remotely, while the **Remote** and **Local** strategies force the pods to be scheduled respectively only remotely and only locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **LocalAndRemote** strategy does not impose any constraints, and it leaves the scheduler the choice to select both local and remote nodes, while the **Remote** and **Local** strategies force the pods to be scheduled respectively only remotely and only locally.
```

{{% notice note %}}
If you specify *pod nodeSelectorTerms* not compatible with these constraints, the pod will remain unscheduled and pending.
{{% /notice %}}

#### clusterSelector

**clusterSelector** specifies the *nodeSelectorTerms* to target specific clusters of the topology. Such *nodeSelectorTerms* can be specified by using the [Kubernetes NodeAffinity syntax](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#node-affinity).  
The selectorTerms specified inside the *namespaceOffloading* are applied on *every pod* created inside the namespace.

> If not specified at creation time, the **clusterSelector** will target all virtual nodes available, enabling the offloading on all peered cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If not specified at creation time, the **clusterSelector** will target all virtual nodes available, enabling the offloading on all peered clusters. 
```

{{% notice tip %}}
If you just want to create deployment topologies that include all available clusters you are not required to choose labels at installation time. 
All virtual nodes expose the label `liqo.io/type = virtual-node` by default.
{{% /notice %}}

### NamespaceOffloading in quick offloading

Also the *quick Offloading* relies on the namespaceOflloading resource. 
In fact, when the label `liqo.io/enabled = true` is added to a namespace, this event triggers the creation of a default *namespaceOffloading* resource inside the namespace.

The generated resource is exactly equal to the template [seen above](#custom-offloading), setting all fields to the default values:

* **namespaceMappingStrategy**: *DefaultName*.
* **podOffloadingStrategy**: *LocalAndRemote*.
* **clusterSelector**: *all remote clusters selection*.

{{% notice info %}}
Using the *quick offloading*, it is not possible to customize the generated *namespaceOffloading* resource. 
If a *namespaceOffloading* is already present in the namespace, you should remove the label first and then create the new resource.

> Removing the label is equivalent to removing the resource directly.

Reviewer: Isn't it added back by the operator if the label is present and the resource is not present?

Author: ATM no, it is not recreated the resource. We will fix this aspect, thank you.

{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice tip %}}

> If you create a custom *namespaceOffloading* inside the namespace, the `liqo.io/enabled = true` label is not necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you create a custom *NamespaceOffloading* resource inside the namespace, the `liqo.io/enabled = true` label is not necessary.
```

Would personally do the same for all occurrences.

As previously said, this label is just a way to configure a *quick offloading*. 
{{% /notice %}}

### Check the namespaceOffloading status

The Liqo controllers update the *namespaceOffloading* every time there is a change in the deployment topology. 
The resource status provides different information:

```bash

> kubectl get namespaceoffloading offloading -n test-namespace -o wide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl get namespaceoffloading offloading -n target-namespace -o wide
```

Is the name `offloading` mandatory? If so, it is not specified in the documentation.

Author: Yes it is mandatory, I have added a "note". Thank you

```

The global offloading status (**OffloadingPhase**) can assume different values:

| Value                 | Description |
| --------------        | ----------- |
| **Ready**             |  Remote Namespaces have been correctly created inside previously selected clusters. |
| **NoClusterSelected** |  No cluster matches user constraints or constraints are not specified with the right syntax (in this second case, an annotation is also set on the namespaceOffloading, specifying what is wrong with the syntax)        |
| **SomeFailed**        |  There was an error during some remote namespaces creation. |
| **AllFailed**         |  There was an error during all remote namespaces creation. |
| **Terminating**       |  Remote namespaces are undergoing graceful termination. |

> Obviously, the **remoteNamespaceName** should match the *namespaceMappingStrategy* chosen in the resource spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **remoteNamespaceName** reflects the *namespaceMappingStrategy* chosen in the resource specifications.
```

Would personally avoid the term *obviously*.

### Offloading termination

> To terminate the offloading, you can remove the *namespaceOffloading* resource inside the namespace or, in case of *quick offloading*, the previously inserted label `liqo.io/enabled = true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To terminate the offloading, you can remove the *namespaceOffloading* resource inside the namespace or, in case of the *quick offloading* approach, the previously inserted label `liqo.io/enabled = true`.
```

---
title: Namespace extension
weight: 3
---
### Introduction

The Liqo namespace model extends the Kubernetes namespace concept introducing the support for remote namespaces, "twins" of the local namespace. 

> Those "twin" namespaces map the home cluster namespace on a remote cluster and its associated resources (e.g., services, configmaps). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those "twin" namespaces map the home cluster namespace and its associated resources (e.g., services, configmaps) on remote clusters. 
```

{{% /notice %}}

#### Selecting the namespace mapping strategy

The namespaceMappingStrategy defines the naming strategy used to create the remote namespaces. 
The accepted values are:

| Value               | Description |
| --------------      | ----------- |
| **DefaultName** (Default)    | The remote namespaces have the name of the local namespace followed by the local cluster-id to guarantee the absence of conflicts. |
| **EnforceSameName** | The remote namespaces have the same name as the namespace in the local cluster (this approach can lead to conflicts if a namespace with the same name already exists inside the selected remote clusters). |

{{% notice info %}}
The DefaultName value is recommended if you do not have particular constraints related to the remote namespaces name. 
However, using the DefaultName policy, the namespace name cannot be longer than 63 characters according to the [RFC 1123](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1123). 
Since the cluster-id is 37 characters long, the home namespace name can have at most 26 characters.
{{% /notice %}}

#### Selecting the pod offloading strategy

> The podOffloadingStrategy defines constraints about pod scheduling.

Reviewer: Should podOffloadingStrategy be pascal case? Same for the other resource fields.

Author: Yes, we could use pascal case, thank you.

| Value              | Description |
| --------------     | ----------- |
| **LocalAndRemote** (Default) | The pods deployed in the local namespace can be scheduled both locally and remotely. |
| **Local**          | The pods deployed in the local namespace are always scheduled inside the local cluster, never remotely. |
| **Remote**         | The pods deployed in the local namespace are always scheduled inside the remote clusters, never locally. |

{{% notice note %}}
Unlike pods, standard Kubernetes services are always replicated inside all the selected clusters.
{{% /notice %}}

The LocalAndRemote strategy does not impose any constraints, and it leaves the scheduler the choice to select both local and remote nodes, while the Remote and Local strategies force the pods to be scheduled respectively only remotely and only locally.

{{% notice note %}}
If you specify pod nodeSelectorTerms not compatible with these constraints, the pod will remain unscheduled and pending.
{{% /notice %}}

#### Selecting the remote clusters

> ClusterSelector specifies the nodeSelectorTerms to target specific clusters of the topology. Such nodeSelectorTerms can be specified by using the [Kubernetes NodeAffinity syntax](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#node-affinity).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ClusterSelector specifies the nodeSelectorTerms to target specific clusters of the topology.
Such nodeSelectorTerms can be specified using the [Kubernetes NodeAffinity syntax](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#node-affinity).  
```
